- The neuroscientific investigations of basic CBT hypotheses have shown that
	- (i) functional and non-functional behavior and experiences may be learned through lifelong learning, due to brain neuroplasticity that continues across the entire lifespan;
	- (ii) cognitive activity contributes to dysfunctional behavior and emotional experience through focusing, selective perception, memory and recall, and characteristic cognitive distortion; on a neurobiological level, there is a relationship between top-down and bottom-up regulation of unpleasant emotional states…
	- iii) cognitive activity may be changed, as shown by therapeutic success achieved by metacognitive and mindfulness techniques, which also have their neurobiological correlates in the changes occurring in the cortical and subcortical structures and endocrine and immune systems
- Cognitive-behavioral therapies (CBT) are short-term, collaborative, problem- focused therapeutic methods aimed at reducing symptoms and improving the quality of life of people with emotional disorders.
- Due to having been rigorously tested, CBT is now considered an empirically- supported treatment for a variety of disorders, such as anxiety disorders, mood disorders, learning difficulties, sexual problems, and bulimia nervosa (Butler, Chapman, Forman, & Beck, 2006; Tolin, 2010).
- Cognitive-behavioral therapies combine **two different theoretical and therapeutic approaches** resulting from two different, but complementary paradigms of human nature and psychopathology.
	- One is the **behavioral paradigm**, based on the learning theory and models of experimental psychology. Its basic idea is that every behavior, either adaptive or maladaptive, has been learned.
	- The other is the **cognitive paradigm**, which claims that mental disorders arise from altered cognitive processes, i.e., specific errors in information processing (Jokić-Begić, 2008).
- There are a rapidly increasing proportion of studies using brain imaging methods to investigate cognitive functioning, emotional experience and self-regulation, psychopathological entities, pharmacotherapeutic and psychotherapeutic effects, placebo effect, and other phenomena traditionally studied within psychology and psychiatry.
- These studies are based on non-invasive brain imaging techniques, such as functional neuroimaging technologies of positron emission tomography (PET) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
- **Life-long Learning**
- The basic CBT hypothesis is that people can continue to learn throughout their lives.
- Every behavior that is learned may be unlearned and replaced by other behavior that is more functional.
- Both functional and dysfunctional behavior is learned.
- CBT helps patients to learn and adopt new knowledge and skills, which will enable them to observe and change their own thoughts, behavior, and emotional states.
- After a successful therapy, patients may be expected to be more functional and have better subjective quality of life.
- Do these changes in behavior and attitude have a neurobiological basis?
  Research has shown that cortical networks in the brain change, including synaptogenesis, neurogenesis (Bjorklund & Lindwall, 2000), and programmed cell death, as a result of one’s experience. The brain is characterized by neuroplasticity, or cortical remapping, which is a complex, multifaceted, and fundamental property of the living brain that allows it to adjust to the changes in environmental and physiological conditions and experience (Pascual- Leone, Amedi, Fregni, & Merabe, 2005)…
- Individual connections within the brain are constantly being removed or recreated, which largely depends upon how they are used.
- One of the key elements of the human brain’s ability to change through neuroplasticity is creation of interconnections between neurons based on their simultaneous firing over a period of time.
- It has also been established that learning accompanied by the development of new neuronal connections also leads to the development of new neurons (Gould, Beylin, Tanapat, Reeves, & Shors, 1999).
- The impact of experience on neural and behavioral development depends on the timing, duration, and intensity of stimuli and biological vulnerability, resilience, potentiating risk factors, and protective effects (Gunnar & Fisher, 2006; Pollak, 2005).
- Research in neurobiology of learning and memory suggests that, after each new learning event, there is a necessary and sufficient change in the nervous system that supports the learning (for review, see Kleim & Jones, 2008).
- Although the cognitive-behavioral paradigm had been developed before the plasticity of the brain was discovered, the compatibility of principles resulting from neuroscientific research and those resulting from CBT theory and practice is quite evidence.
-
- Cognitive therapy does not assume that cognitions cause mental disorders, but they play an important role in the development of disorders, assessment of social support, and recovery from the disorder (Živčić-Bećirević, 2003).
- Changing cognitive activity will lead to changes in emotional response and then in the behavior. During CBT, a patient learns how to self-regulate unpleasant emotions, which is essential for mental health (Beauregard, 2007).
- From a neurobiological perspective, different regions of the brain are involved in emotion regulation processes. Generation and regulation of emotions involves interplay between two modes of information processing: automatic, reflexive, bottom-up and effortful, symbolic, and top-down processes (…
- Bottom-up processing is a primitive, automatic, effortless, implicit, and preconscious information processing dominated by the salient features of a relevant stimulus or situational cues and their schematic associations (Clark & Beck, 2010).
- Top-down processing is slow, deliberate, explicit, and strategic form of rational processing that uses rule-based knowledge to guide the information processing system (Clark & Beck, 2010).
- The results of studies of neurobiological changes have shown that CBT is associated with decreased activity in the amygdalohippocampal subcortical region (i.e., bottom-up processing) and increased activation in the frontal cortical regions (i.e., top-down processing) (Clark & Beck, 2010).
- Studies indicate that symptom improvement in anxiety or depression after CBT is associated with decreased activity in the amygdalo-
- hippocampal subcortical regions that involve bottom-up emotion processing and improved activity of top-down processes in the orbitofronatl cortex (OFC), medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), and the ventral and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC).
- Previous comparative studies of pharmacotherapy versus CBT showed that their therapeutic success depended on the type of disorder, criteria of success, duration of follow-up, research methodology, and so on (Dobson, 2009).
- One of the explanations is that pharmacotherapy modifies the bottom-up regulation by influencing the subcortical transmitter metabolism and thus eliciting a change in subjective mood and cognition.
  On the other hand, psychotherapy influences top- down regulation by modifying the patient’s implicit relational patterns and attitudes (Gabbard, 2000).
  Goldapple et al. (2004) found that drug treatment affects limbic- subcortical regions (brainstem, insula, subgenual cingulate), whereas CBT influences the medial frontal and cingulate cortex. This finding also explains the commonly observed lower relapse rate in clients undergoing CBT, whether or not combined with medications (Dozois, Bieling, & Patelis-Siotis, 2009; Segal & Gemar, 1999; Segal et al., 2006).
- Without the changes in top-down regulation elicited by new and repeated experiences, i.e., emotional, verbal and interpersonal processes of learning, there can be no permanent changes in behavior patterns (Fuchs, 2004).
- Abelson, Liberzon, Young, and Khan (2005) aimed to determine the significance of cognitive factors in the regulation of physiological responses, but without inclusion of emotional states. The authors administered infusion of penagestrin, which activates stress axis subjectively manifested as a panic attack. They also administered a short-term cognitive intervention to help subjects attain a feeling of control over the situation when infusion was administered and instructed them how to reduce the feeling of stress and threat.
- The results showed that cognitive intervention influenced the cortisol blood level but not the subjective level of stress, that cognition had a significant influence on the endocrine system, and that relationship was not mediated by emotional states.
- Neuroscientific research, however, emphasizes the significance of positive emotional states as facilitators of a neurobiological change.
- New scientific research on neuroplasticity suggests that positive emotional states may trigger lasting, durable changes in the structure and function of the brain (for a review, see
- Therefore, CBT orientation towards creating a positive and optimistic atmosphere, which is attained by removal of symptoms, is neurobiologically justified.
- Mindfulness involves a systematic retraining of awareness and non-reactivity, enabling the person to consciously choose adequate thoughts, emotions, and sensations rather than habitually reacting to them (Arch & Craske, 2006; Chambers, Gullone, & Allen, 2009).
- Mindfulness CBT is documented to have a positive effect on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and hormonal and immune system (Carlson, Speca, Faris, & Patel, 2007; O’Loughlin & Zuckerman, 2008).
- Studies of placebo effect show that beliefs and expectations may significantly shape neurophysiological and neurochemical activity in brain regions involved in perception, movements, pain, different emotional states (Beauregard, 2007). By changing the mind, we change the brain (Paquette et al., 2003).
- Schwartz has developed a CBT therapy for OCD clients on the basis of their clinical and research experience, taking into account the principles of neuroplasticity and CBT (Schwartz & Begley, 2002). The main goal of this treatment is to teach clients how to observe their obsessions as an accidental brain activity that should be responded to in a new and more adaptive way. The treatment always consists of the following 4 steps: relabel, reattribute, refocus, and revalue. The first step involves teaching patients to relabel the intrusive thoughts and urges as the symptoms of OCD disorder. In the second step, patients are encouraged to reattribute the bothersome and persistent nature of the symptoms to ‘false messages’ coming from a dysfunctional brain.
- The goal of the first two steps is to change the relationship toward OCD symptoms, which may result in intensification of the feeling that the person has a choice of what to do after the symptoms penetrate into the consciousness.
- In the third step, patients learn to change behavioral responses while the uncomfortable intrusive thoughts and urges are still present. In the fourth step, patients come to revalue the intrusive thoughts and urges as much less important and noteworthy, and the fear and anxiety associated with them gradually disappear.
- A very important aspect of this treatment is mindfulness, i.e., perceiving one’s own thoughts and feelings as short-term events that reflect OCD rather than reality.